Lettre N° 1.416
SÉNAT
££Paris, 3 Novembre 1923££
LE TÉMOIGNAGE D'UN OFFICIER AMÉRICAIN
QUI NON SEULEMENT €à€££a££ COMBATTU pour LES FRANCAIS mais à EPOUSÉ
UNE FRANCAISE AU MANS.
Mon cher Butler,
Je vous ai parlé de ce jeune officier Américain
Flaig, si remarquablement intelligent et enthousias€m€££t££e qui est
venu me voir à Créans au printemps dernier.
Voici la lettre qu’il m'écrit concernant la tragédie
dont il est témoin à Berlin où il réside maintenant.
Que faire dans ce pareil chaos ? Dois-je me féliciter
de n'être qu’impuissant et non pas victime, comme tant d’autres,
des misérables qui ont voulu la guerre et££l'££éternisent ?
Votre affectueusement dévoué.
££d'Estournelles££
à Monsieur le Président Nicholas Murray BUTLER
NEW-YORK
ANNEXE à ma LETTRE N° 1.416
REINHART von OETTIGER BERLIN W. 9 .
Orientalische Teppiche
Berlin, den 24th October, 1923.
Budapester Strasse 2-3
an T€e€££i££ergarten,
Hon. M. Paul H.B. D'Estournelles de Constant.
34 ter, rue Molitor, Paris, France.
Dear Monsieur D'Estournelles,
Back again to Berlin after a few lovely days in France
with Madame and Jean. Came at a most unusual moment and have suffi-
cient time to brouse around. From what I have seen and learned the
World knows very little of Germany's present condition, especially
so with America.
Wages two weeks ago were still paid in millions,
to-day nothing can be purchased without billions of Marks. Six
Million old people unable to work are absolutely helpless, wretched
and bewildered. The staggering sums one is compelled to pay for the
simplest necessity is enough to make old people frantic and young
people demoralized.
At this writing, the stree€st€££ts££ of Berlin are lined
with beggers, not professionals by far, but only because of dire
necessity. Many of whom moved about in the highest circles at one
time and as one might expect some of these prefer to resign them-
selves to fate than face the humiliation of being a pauper.
As I read again your book"America and her proplems"
and the part the Balance Sheet of the War€5€ I must say it was well
€i€££m££easured ! As only one with your age and experience in having to do
with moulding affairs of the World could have foreseen. How interest-
ing and how repulsive. To-day vour prediction is the truth, only more
severe. Austria as we spoke on the train has been extinguished but
Germany mortally wounded and sick, flat on her back without even
Doctors care or medecine. She cannot liberate herself and bring about
her own salvation witnout the aid of the Doctor.
You know I have hopes to live so many years as you
have lived. If for no other cause than to watch the events of history
- 2 -
and the probable fulfilment of things thought out in my youth. I
am thinking now of the millions of miserable creatures, of the streets,
victims of a great Commercial War, who most all went through it and
lost. Then to suffer hunger and starvation. Forty years may bring
a Goethe, Schiller or Kant, who will have had plenty of material
without searching. What he will write about these famished millions
and countless Profiteers who employed slaves and transferred their
fortunes to foreign countries, deserted this country, left slaves
behind to pay for this War is vitally interesting. Also the€ir€££re££ will
be other wars, bet-ween countries other than this one, perhaps both
will have offers to this country to side in. This will also be
worth watching, as both were former enemies.
It seems to me that the stone age law still prevails
to-day. That as you say "Might makes Right". It may not be wanted
but is still present and effective. The map with the muscle can
lick his neighbour who has none and so with nations. To lick this
neighbour and perhap€p€££s££ kill him is bad also, his lifeless body may
rot,at one££'££s door-step and breed microbes, with which to eat into
one's own housenold.
Certainly Monsieur d'Estournelles you are a busy man
with little time for letters as this, but you once told me that I
should write when someting was of interest. I hop€d€££e££ that t££h££is will be
for then this mid-nigh€n€££t££ session will be overpaid. You are, I believe,
a lover of Peace, Justice and Highteousness toward Humanity even tho
the Powers that be place commercial interest ahead of these.
Kindly accept my best wishes for Madame and yourself.
Very truly yours
E. FLAIG
P.S.- Would enjoy a bri€f€££e££f note from you sometime when not too
busy.