LETTRE N° 878
PARIS, 24 Septembre 1921
LES ÉTUDIANTS de GÉORGIE à PARIS.
Mon cher Butler,
Géorgie en France con££c££ernant la douloureuse situation de ses jeunes
Je reçois la lettre ci-jointe de M. le Ministre de
compatriotes, étudiants à Paris.
Je m’empresse de signaler cette situation à M. le Mi-
nistre des Affaires Etrangères de France et à M. le Recteur de
l'Université de Paris, en même temps qu’à vous-même.
De votre côté, que pensez-vous que nous puissions faire?
Votre affectueusement dévoué,
££d'Estournelles££
à Monsieur le Président Nicholas M. BUTLER.
NEW-YORK.-
COPIE
££Annexe à ma Lettre N°878££
LÉGATION de GÉORGIE
Paris, September 22nd 1921.
44, avenue Victor Hugo. (16°)
The Carnegie Foundation.
24, rue Pierre Curie,
PARIS
Sirs,
I have the honor, in the name of the Government of the
Georgian Republic which I represent as her Envoy Extraordinary and
Minister Plenipotentiary accredited to the French Republic, the
British Empire and the Kingdom of Italy, to address to you the
following request:-
3 years ago Georgia, through the downfall of the Russian
Empire reconquered, the same as Poland and Finland, her Independence,
destroyed a century ago. This Independence was recognized "de jure"
by the Powers of Europe (England, France, Italy, Germany, Belgium,
Austria, etc. ). Japan and most of the South and Central-American
Republica.
The Government of the new Republic in organising the
state devoted itself specially to the improvement of public Educa-
tion, notably of higher education. After having founded the Georgian
University at Tiflis the Government decided to send to Europe and
America a certain number of the best students as holders of State
scholarships, these young people having been chosen by the Ministry
- 2 -
of Public Education from the number of those who had finished their
full school course.
By so doing the Government proposed to constitute for
different branches of science and learning a number of highly trai-
ned groops au courant with the latest methods and progress of occi-
dental science.
The maintenance of these students was provided for by the
Government and was to be cont€u€££i££nued until the end of their studies.
The number or these students holding Statescholarships
was as follows:-
in France ..... 18
in England .... 5
in Germary .... 42
in Belgium .... 3
in Italy ...... 5
in America …. 1
TOTAL ... 74
The Georgian Government further undertook the instruc-
tion-fees of each student.
Besides these Scholarships-Students there are now in
various countries a certain number of Georgian students who have
been sent by and at the expense of their families to study at dif-
rerent Universities, the number of these students beeing about 9 in
France alone.
Such was the situation, when in February last the armies
of Soviet Russia, although at Peace and in defiance of all the enga-
gements and treaties entered into by the bolchevist Government of
Moscow, invaded Georgia and obliged the Government to leave the
-3-
country.
Thus deprived of resources, the organizations of the
Georgian Goverment abroad are not able to continue their support
of those students as planned, even in decreasing their allowances.
As regards the non-scholarship or independent students
these latter, cut off from their families from whom they can no
longer receive money, find themselves since February last in a ho-
peless situation ; they cannot, tne same as the Scholarship students,
return to their homes being all more or less known as patriots and
anti-bolchevists. My legation has helped them within the limits of
its power but is not able to do so further.
Many of the students, independent as well as scholarship
holders have but one year longer to complete their studies.
What will become of these young people ; the great hope
of the Georgian Nation, who removed from all political agitation
were acquiring knowledge which would help them to contribute to the
reconstruction of their country?
How will they be able to find work, sojourners in stran-
ge lands?
I have every confidence that this exceptional case which
I have the honor to bring before you, - representing as it does the
very aim to which the activity cf the Carnegie Foundation is uni-
quely directed, - may meet with a speedy and favorable decision on
your part.
Allow me to draw your attention to the fact that this
request concerns a very limited number of young people representing
the very best of a whole Nation's youth and that their loss to the
country would ££be an irrevocable national catastrophy.££
-4-
As I have already said it is in the hope of a favorable
decision on your part that I beg by the present to draw the atten-
tion of the Carnegie Foundation to the terrible situation in which
these students find themselves as a result of the events which re-
cently took place in Georgia and led to a temporary military occu-
pation of the Territory of the Republic by the troops of the Invador
I remain,
Sirs,
Yours truly,
A. TCHENKELI
Minister of Georgia.