LETTRE N° 555 bis .
££Molitor££
SÉNAT
NEW YORK, 28th of Juy 1919.
THE CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT BUREAU
BECOMING A REAL CENTRE .
My dear Butler,
I think it is necessary that, before sailing, I give you
a short "résumé" of the conclusions I have arrived at here, after
many conferences, visits and meditations, concerning some of the
principal questions we have at heart.
First of all, here is what I told, with the most deep
conviction, to our friends about the question XX of the organisation
of our respective French, British and American great private
Associations for helping and controling the official creation or
development of a League or Société of Nations.
Your American Association is the "LEAGUE T0 ENFORCE
PEACE", presided by Mr W. TAFT. - The British is the Association
XX for a LEAGUE OF NATIONS presided by Lord GREY. The French
is the Association for a SOCIÉTÉ des NATIONS presided by M. Léon
BOURGEOIS. They have all three, one same aim : fundation and organ-
ization of a durable and just peace. Each of them is supported by
the most important personalities in their respective countries;
- 2 -
each of them is nationally very representative.
Still each of them is and will be more and more very poor
and powerless! why? because they have one common and unique object and
three different administrations with no connection whatever. They
know practically very little of each other ; they have no programmes
in common, no correspondance, no exchange of visits, no "personel",
no "bureau " in common.
They had indeed two very important and effective meetings
while the official conference of Paris was at work, but, after that
Conference has finished its work and the treaty of Paris€,€ was
signed, they had €nothing€ nothing more in common. They decided to
abandon the very modest but quite convenient, bureau which the
American Association had asked us, by cablegram to organized in
common and which we had succeeded very happily notwithstanding
many material difficulties at the beginning or the present year,
to improvise 254 Boulevard Saint-Germain, in the best quarter in
Paris. This decision to abandon that common bureau has been most
regrettable, and €I€ specially have deplored it because I knew what
a lot of difficulties we had to establish that common beginning of
a common organization .
It was not only the location, the apartment, the furniture€,€
it vas chiefly the personnel.
Our American friends€,€ and it is the same with most of
our French and British friends, have no idea of the extreme
difficulty of finding and bringing together a respectable, devoted
and sufficiently trained common personnel. The people one can find
- 3 -
are generally more dangerous than XXXX useful; you cannot trust
them. I had succeeded with the devoted and passionated help of the
friend who have been associated to the long and active experiences
of my life, I had succeeded in finding for the three associations
two or three collaborators nearly providential; one of them, Miss
MATHEWS, speaking and writing English as well as French, quite a
Lady, of about fifty, was so admirably prepared to the work by her
aptitudes, her education, her exceptional training and her personal
great respectability and devotion, that it is really stupide, allow
me to say so, not to avail ourselves of the great services she can
render and she has arlready rendered. Every body appreciated her as
I do, as Madame d'ESTOURNELLES de CONSTANT does, as your American
and our British and our other friends do.
Still, now we have no more, for our three associations,
the common apartment we need. Are we going to dismiss the personnel?
How then, shall we prepare our common necessary meetings,
our common necessary correspondances, our common necessary exchange
of informations? We will prepare nothing we will go back to our
common regime of re££s££pective ignorance and misunderstanding and we
are calling ourselves "Associations for the creation and the
development of a League of Nations££"!££
How vill the official league work at Genève if we give
that example of incapacity of XXXX organ££i££sing our private
associations? 
It is so bad, (knowing that I cannot indefinitely, at my
- 4 -
age, give the effort I have given to establish that common bureau,)
that I have tried to save it, or to save somet££h££ing of it. And that
is what I am very sorry I could not speak of with you. Because writing
and dictating English is most unsatisfactory to me.
Our "Conciliation" is the spirit which has always inspired
and supported all kind of serious efforts for a good organisation€s€
of pacific activity. That is why we have given our he££l££p to the meetin
of the three Associations and others, like Italian, Belgian, and
so on, in Paris, in London, in Bruxelles. - That is why the CARNEGIE
ENDOWMENT which has been, from the beginning, a fruit of our
CONCILIATION, has supported these meetings by paying some of the
expense. This contribution was a wise one ; it was only too modest.
My conclusion now is this one ; it is the only way to save
the necessary cooperation of the generous private activities of
our two countries with our other allied, and all nations in the
future.
I propose that our CONCILIATION together with the
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT contributes to the keeping of a small common
Bureau in Paris, next our European Bureau of the rue Pierre-Curie,
I have taken upon my responsability to secure one small apartment
just next our own apartment, same house, 24 rue Pierre-Curie.
There, we shall have a few rooms, which we need for our natural
expansion. Besides, we shall keep the drawing rooms for the common
Bureau of the three Associations for a LEAGUE OF NATIONS. There Miss
MATHEWS will remain with two or three young secretaries of her
choice who have proved al€o€ready their aptitude and devotion. So our
- 5 -
common activities will go on keeping in one same premises their
necessary and handy center.
I have spoken of this necessity, before leaving Paris, to
M. BOURGEOIS and to our French colleagues as well as to some British
colleagues of our XXXXXXX (see my letter to Colonel FISHER. I have
spoken quite at length privately or in public) to M. TAFT, to M.
STRAUSS, M. H. HOLT. to M. SHORT. They all agree on the principle.
But the principle is nothing with no organization.
The CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT and our CONCILIATION may now prove,
once more, the importance of their services by helping the quite
natural agregation in Paris of the different international organisation
which are in XXXXXXXXXX search of each other.
I accept to give my time for securing, on a modest but
serious and durable basis, this agregation.
I have made the necessary calculations of the expenses;
it will come to very little.
The CONCILIATION is my own apartment and cost nearly
nothing, although it is practically the h££e££ad quarter of all the centres
organisation€s€.
The Bureau de la rue Pierre-Curie has to foresee a serious
increase of its annual lease, which will amount from 3.500 francs to
4.500.
The apartment of the secretary M. PUECH will be : 3.700
- 6 -
The library (Bibliothèque Frédéric PASSY)
4.500
3.700
4.000
The/apartment we are rather lucky to be able to
annex, for our own expansion, will be: 4.500
The new apartment XXXX of 4.500 francs will be
sufficient XX to keep, as two big spare rooms,
TOTAL16.700
a sufficient space for the common bureau of the three Associations
for a League of Nations.
What a valuable and natural service will render the
Carnegie Endowment and the Conciliation by supporting the existence
and pratically the international activity of such great new national
associations!
These associations having no more rent , and no direction
to pay, will have only to divide in three shares the salaries of
Miss MATHEWS and her assistants. ; and their expenditures, that is
to say about one ££t££housand francs, a mouth each.
I should like you te ask the Executive Committee of the
CARNEGIE ENDOWMENT whether they do not agree with me in thinking
that it would be a pity not to avail ourselves of this opportunity
for proving the utility of tne ENDOWMENT?
Practically nearly no expense and a great direction, a
great service.
I should like you to give a copy of the present hasty
note to Mr SHORT for Mr TAFT, Mr E. ROOT, Mr O. STRAUS and other
friend of the American Associations of the League to Enforce PEACE
If you come with them, as I do believe it is probable, to
an agreement, I am sure it will be the beginning of a/great future
for our respective national Associations.
- 7 -
United they will live and do a great work. Separated and
ignorant of each other, they will be sterile.
Yours sincerely
££d'Estournelles de Constant££
P. S. I leave for another note the other questions; they are not so
important and urgent.
ident N. Murray BUTLER
XXXX
